Self-assisted Amoeboid Navigation in Complex Environments

Introduction

Cellular migration has been an intriguing phenomenon for many years.
From wound healing and immune response of mammalian cells, to
chemotaxing bacteria and amoeba, living cells exhibit a variety of
motility abilities *REF*.

Most motile cells attempt to follow external directional signals (in
the form of chemical or mechanical gradients) while moving in a
complex environment. For example, immune system cells follow chemical
gradients as they leave the vascular system and migrate through
cellular tissues towards the site of an inflammation
*REF*, and metastasizing cancer cells invade through
the surrounding tissues to form secondary tumors
*REF*  *REF*. These processes require
transiting through an environment consisting of other cells and
extracellular matrix (ECM). The chemotactic process therefore involves
both a response to the external signal, and the handling of mechanical
constraints on the motion.

From the computational point of view, much research has been devoted
to the study of autonomous motion planning *REF*. An
important part of autonomous taxis is the ability to independently
navigate, namely to find a path to a defined target under possible
constraints. This ability, which is essential for cellular
translocation *REF* and for the study of animal
behavior *REF*, is also important for successful
robotic exploration. For individual agent-based navigation, one
obvious way of encoding target information is by having the target
emit a signal (steady or dynamic), which allows the agent to determine
a locally favorable direction. But, it is clear that the locally best
direction may not be the overall best choice, as this may lead to
trapping of the agent by large obstacles. Optimally, the agent should
balance this target-based information with local structural
information so as to navigate around these traps. The conceptual view
that cells should integrate multiple sources of information can lead to new 
predictions regarding cellular chemotaxis; this will be seen below.

In this work, we will study these questions by use of a simplified
model of cellular navigation capabilities. Efforts in the biological
and biophysical community have elucidated the basic elements
underlying how cells are able to navigate via chemical gradients.
First, the external signal influences the cell orientation by various
signal transduction pathways, highly conserved between different cell
types. Consequently, the cell polarizes and different chemicals
accumulate at the front versus the back of the cell. Motility is
typically obtained by f-actin polymerization at the cell&apos;s front,
leading to membrane protrusions such as pseudopods, lamellipods and
ruffles. Beyond individual propulsion, the cell interacts with its
environment by various passive as well as active processes: The cell
can adhere or de-adhere to the extra -cellular matrix or to
neighboring cells *REF*  *REF*, apply
forces and even actively degrade the ECM by proteases *REF*.

Many attempts have been made to model different aspects of directed
migration and chemotaxis. Most models to date have addressed distinct
parts of motility, including retraction and protrusion
*REF*, but are unable to describe the entire motility
process; other models use ad-hoc rules to describe the motion
*REF*. Many studies, both theoretical and
experimental, have also been devoted to the question of collective
motion and how it emerges from individual interactions
*REF*, from the cellular to the animal scale. In
this work we focus on single cell motility, but our results can be
extended to the case of collective motion by adding intra-cellular interactions.

Here, as a first step in the study of navigation in complex media, we
study the ability of a moving cell to navigate between obstacles. We
isolate the sensing and motility from adhesion and proteolysis and
focus on the strategies needed by the cell so as to find its way under
environmental constraints. We do so by using a simulated amoeboid,
crawling in different environments according to an external signal. We
first study the characteristics of free motion in a chemoattractant
gradient, then turn to the effects of obstacles in the medium, and
finally to the more challenging case of navigation in a maze. In the
case of a maze, motion according to the local chemical direction can cause the
cell to become trapped by the maze walls. When this occurs, the cell
needs to retrace its steps, moving away from the optimal chemical
direction, in order to find a new pathway and resume its motion towards the target.

We demonstrate that memory-less navigation yields very low success
rates, and that in most cases the cell becomes stuck in a maze corner
or dead end, and cannot reach its goal. We then show that a simple
memory effect mediated by a chemical marker secreted and detected by
the cell, can lead to much higher success rates. We propose to term
this type of behavior &apos;self-assisted&apos; navigation since the cell by
virtue of the marker emission is able to recognize that it is trapped
and thereby alter its behavior so as to assist itself in trying to
escape. We hypothesize that navigation based on this type of mechanism
is a likely possibility for chemotaxis in complex environments; this
can obviously be tested in, for example, microfluidics devices where
flow can be used to interfere with marking strategies. Finally, this
finding provides insights into needed components for successful robotic motion planning.

Results

Amoeboid motion

Amoeboids, unlike bacteria, can directly detect spatial gradients in
chemical concentration, responding to as low as a 2% difference in
concentration between the cell&apos;s front and back
*REF*. Chemotaxis, i.e. motion according to the
gradient direction, is then achieved by sending out membrane
protrusions (pseudopods), with a typical life time. Pseudopods are
mostly created in the leading edge of the cell (cell&apos;s front), but
some pseudopods may emerge also from the sides, depending on the
gradient strength and cell polarization
*REF*  *REF*. The overall cellular motion
is achieved by retraction of the cell&apos;s rear towards the advancing
front. Pseudopods typically exhibit complex behavior of bifurcation
and retraction, with some periodicity of right-left split directions *REF*.

The formation of pseudopods is accompanied by accumulation of various
effectors on the membrane, in the form of &apos;patches&apos; with limited
lifetime *REF*. These patches were shown to spatially correlate with the location of pseudopods
*REF*  *REF*. Genetic studies have
verified that these effectors are controlled by the external chemical
signal and in turn are responsible for activating the machinery that
drives the extensional dynamics.

Amoeboid directional motion: Model

In our model, the internal direction of the cell (the cell
polarization axis) is determined by the external gradient of the
signaling field with some added noise. This simple mechanism is
intended to mimic the gradient sensing process, without explicitly
dealing with receptor occupancies. And indeed, in our previous work
*REF* we have shown that such a &apos;noisy compass&apos;
mechanism can produce pseudopod statistics and overall directional
motion which closely resemble real cell&apos;s behavior.

The compass noise is drawn from a Gaussian distribution, and the
distribution width is inversely related to the steepness of the
gradient: A steep gradient yields more accurate directional sensing,
and hence there is less noise (and vice versa); this was chosen so
that our model would be in agreement with experimental data comparing
response at different gradient strengths *REF*. The
membrane point which is the closest to the internal gradient vector is
chosen to be the new cell front. This directional sensing process
takes place every few minutes and has no hysteresis.

After determining the new front position, a patch of activation is
created on the membrane. This patch determines the membrane area that
will be pushed outward to create a pseudopod. The size and lifetime of
the patch are randomly drawn from a given range, fitted to
experimental data (See Supporting Table S1 for more details). After
this lifetime, the patch is gradually degraded and a new patch is
created. Other forces acting on the cell membrane include cortical
tension, constant area constraint and friction (see Supporting Text S1
for more details). The forward front pushing and back retraction, due
to the constant area constraint, lead to net forward motion. The
cortical tension determines the width of membrane protrusions and
influences the shape of the cell (e.g. round or slender). Once all the
forces are calculated, we determine the velocity change at each membrane
point and advance the membrane simultaneously. Technical and
computational details, and the form of each of the forces, are given
in detail in Supporting Text S1.

Freely moving amoeboid

When no obstacles are present, the cell motion and shape dynamics
depend on the internal parameters such as the activation patch size,
patch lifetime and the ratio between the protruding force and the
cortical tension, as well as on the steepness of the gradient.
Generally, a cell can have several, independent areas of activation
(„patches‟), and the number of protrusions will vary accordingly. In
Fig. 1 we show the simulated movement of two typical model cells, one
with a single activated patch (Fig 1.(a)-(b)) and one with two
activated patches (Fig. 1(c)-(d)). Different types of cells exhibit
different numbers of protrusions, and the number of patches in the
model can be tuned to match a specific cell type. In this work we
focus on the case of a single protrusion, mostly for simplicity and to save computation time.

The chemotactic index (CI) of the cell is defined as the ratio between
the distance traveled in the direction of the signal and the overall
distance traveled by the cell, and experimentally was found to depend
on the gradient steepness *REF*. In our model,
steepness lowers the noise variance and for a narrower noise
distribution, the CI increases and the cell path becomes more
accurate. In Fig. 2 we show typical paths for the cases of low versus
high noise levels. It is easy to see that the path to the target is
more accurate when the noise level is low, namely when the gradient is
steeper. This has been studied in detail elsewhere, using a more
complex reaction-diffusion model for generating the patches *REF*.

Navigation between obstacles

Amoeboid-like motion is directly advantageous in the presence of
obstacles. When the cell encounters an obstacle directly ahead, it
cannot continue to move in the direction of the protrusion, but can
still move in other directions. As a result, the cell slides along the
walls of the obstacle, as the points adjacent to the obstacle are
stuck while points slightly away are free to move. When a new
activation patch is created, it will typically not be centered at a
point that is attached to the obstacle; rather it will be shifted to a
free point. This simple mechanism yields an efficient obstacle-passing mechanism, as can be
seen in Fig. 3. It also creates an impression of the obstacles
&apos;guiding&apos; the motion, as seen in experiments
*REF*  *REF*. It is the nature of
amoeboid motion, i.e. the creation of stochastic and recurring
protrusions, as well as a flexible cell shape, that allows for this
efficient obstacle circumvention. Ongoing directional change is a
constant feature of amoeboid motion, and thus the process of bypassing
an obstacle does not demand any additional special mechanism or
procedure. It should be noted, though, that this notion only applies
to obstacles of the amoeboid‟s size or less, as will be shown in the
next section. Navigation between obstacles is mostly a question of
locally bypassing one obstacle at a time. As long as the cell is
flexible enough and the obstacles are not too large, the cell can fit
between the obstacles and proceed forward without the need for
sophisticated longer-range analysis, memory or &apos;intelligence&apos;.

Navigation in a maze

The situation changes when the cell is exposed to a complex terrain
with obstacles larger than the cell size. In this case the cell may
spend a long time in attempts to bypass the obstacles, especially when
they happen to be perpendicular to the direction of the chemical
gradient. We have chosen to illustrate this situation by considering
navigation in a maze, as the cell can now be trapped by the maze
walls. The example shown in Fig. 4 presents a case in which the
chemical gradient points to the central top area of the maze, with
several possible pathways from the starting point to this target.
Importantly, signaling molecules can freely diffuse through the maze
walls (see also the Discussion section below), and as a result, there
are points inside the maze where the local direction of the gradient
leads to a corner or a dead end (marked with asterisks in Fig. 4). A
chemotaxing amoeboid that precisely follows the signal may therefore
get stuck in such a local trap. Escaping the trap demands motion in a
direction different from the one dictated by the signal. This poses a
challenge that may demand more than the simple chemotaxis capability
that is sufficient in the case of small obstacle circumvention.

When the noise distribution width is taken to be large (corresponding
in our model to the case of a small gradient) and fixed, the cell&apos;s
path is curved and the cell can indeed explore different paths in the maze; this is shown in Fig. 5(a)-(b). 
With high noise the cell may get off the trail, but it can also overcome a local
barrier by moving in an opposite direction for a short while. This
behavior is not all that beneficial to the cell though, since the
search is inefficient; the cell spends a long time en route and
sometimes wanders far away from the well-defined external direction.
When the noise is lower, the cell always chooses the shortest path and
wanders around much less, as shown in Fig. 5(c), but is also easily
stuck (Error! Reference source not found.(d)) as it obeys the
external constraint precisely and cannot move against the dictated
direction

Adaptive noise

One possible strategy to evade traps is that of noise adaptation. In
our baseline model, the noise has a fixed value, set by the global
strength of the gradient. However, organisms moving in different
environments may need to adapt their noise level and adjust it to the
different terrains. In fact, chemotaxing amoebas such as
Dictyostelium automatically exhibit different noise levels when
moving in different strength local gradients *REF*,
due to the underlying mechanism of directional sensing by receptor
occupancy differences. Following this notion, we choose the noise
distribution width to dynamically depend on the relative difference
in the chemoattractant concentration between the cell&apos;s front and
back: FORMULA where the minimal concentration defines the cell back and the maximal
concentration Cmin defines the cell front. A large difference between the cell&apos;s front
and back results in a Cmax narrow noise distribution, while a small difference between the front
and the back implies noisier directional sensing and a wider noise
distribution. This dynamic noise selection allows the cell to adjust
to the varying environment and partially optimize its search strategy.

However, even with this type of adaptive noise, chemotactic navigation
is not very successful. To estimate the efficiency and success rate of
each of the tested strategies, we repeated the simulation in the same
maze and with the same starting point. Given the stochasticity of the
patch generation process in the model, a different path was obtained
in each run. If the cell managed to get to the defined ending point
within the defined simulation time limit, it is counted as successful.
Out of approximately 250 such runs, the computational cell was found
to become stuck in 70.1% of the cases and only 29.9% of the cells
could eventually reach the target (red zone). In two other maze/signal
configurations, 100% of the cells became stuck. An example of a
trapped cell and its path is shown in Fig. 6(a). Therefore, navigating via the chemoattractant gradient by itself
is insufficient in the case of large obstacles that block the way.
Motion against the gradient on a scale larger than the cell&apos;s length
is needed.

The &apos;self-assistance&apos; strategy

To consider a possible new navigation strategy that can enhance escape
from traps, we add to our model a repulsive chemical field,
continuously secreted by the cell. When the cell is trapped in a
specific location, the level of this chemical increases and acts to
mask the external chemoattractant. For simplicity, we assumed that the
two chemicals (i.e. the external chemoattractant and the secreted
chemorepellent) have exactly opposite effects on the cell&apos;s
navigation, so the cell observes an effective field given by:
FORMULA, where Csig is the concentration of the external signal, Cchem is
the concentration of the FORMULA secreted chemical, and Ceff is the effective concentration detected
by the cell. The secretion Ceff and detection of this chemical marker acts as a memory, which actively
marks areas in the maze that have already been visited. This chemical
can diffuse, with various possible choices for the diffusion rate; as
we will see, the only significant limitation is that it cannot diffuse
too quickly and thereby lose the information as to the cell&apos;s recent
positions. We term this strategy &apos;self-assistance&apos;, as the cell is
able to escape the trap without any external help. The effect of this
augmented navigation is demonstrated in Fig. 6(b) (the full list of
parameters values is given in Supporting Table S1). The cell is
initially trapped by the maze walls (as in Fig. 6(a)) but due to the
increasing level of secreted repulsive chemical, the cell eventually
selects a new direction that leads it out of the corner. Additional
details regarding this effect is shown in Fig. 6(c), where the
difference between the chemoattractant and the chemorepellent is
represented using a color code. The areas that had been previously visited by the cell have a clearly lower
effective concentration, and the color roughly indicates the time
spent in a specific location. The success rate for this type of
navigation is significantly higher than that of simple chemotaxis --
using around 250 runs on the maze shown in Fig. 4, the success rate
rose from 29.9% to as high as 99%. For the other maze/signal
configurations that were tested we obtained an increase from zero
success to 72% and 76% using the &apos;self-assistance&apos; procedure (data not shown).

We specifically tested the effect of the repulsive chemical‟s
diffusion on the success rates of the moving cell. As expected, the
success rate is high for low diffusivities, and falls significantly
when diffusion rate exceeds a threshold, as shown in Fig. 7. This
is reasonable, as fast diffusion blurs the spatial information needed
to make the correct decision and instead the cell actually responds
only to the external chemical gradient.

The passage time in the maze, namely the time it takes to reach the
target, is an indicator of search efficiency. The search time for
&apos;self-asssisted&apos; navigation is significantly shorter than that of a
simple chemotactic navigation (see Fig. 8). Just as we found for the
success rate, the search time increases rapidly (namely the efficiency
is decreased) as the chemical diffusion rate exceeds the threshold.

Discussion

Amoeboid motion is found in different biological systems, not only in
amoeba per se but also in migrating mammalian cells. For example,
metastasizing cancer cells are able to transform from the mesenchymal
mode of motion, in which they move by degradation of the ECM, to the
amoeboid mode, in which they move through the ECM by cell shape
deformations *REF*. Invading cells, both normal and
cancerous, interact with the extracellular matrix (ECM) in a two-fold
manner. The ECM acts as a physical scaffold that binds cells together
into tissues and guides cellular migration along matrix tracks, but it
also presents a physical barrier that cells need to overcome -- either
by proteolysis or by a shape change. The roles of the ECM and the
influence of its specific features (such as pore size and density) on
cellular invasion are in the focus of current biomedical research, both
in vivo and in vitro *REF*  *REF*.
Importantly, the ECM also elicits biochemical and biophysical
signaling, which may influence cellular differentiation and motility.

Migrating amoeboid cells are able to change their shape drastically in
order to adapt to encountered constraints and thereby push through
narrow places. These cells have low levels of integrin expression,
reduced focal contacts, a low degree of adhesiveness and significantly
higher motility velocities as compared to mesenchymal cells
*REF*  *REF*. Amoeboid shape-driven
migration allows cells to evade, rather than degrade, barriers, and
enables migration even when mesenchymal motility is impossible. Recent
experimental work has shown that cells that were restricted to
amoeboid motility, by inhibition of matrix metalloproteases (MMPs)
could still invade pores that were as small as the nuclear size of the
cell *REF*. New evidence also supports a central
role for amoeboid motility in cell migration and cancer cell invasion
*REF*. One consequence of this fact is that treatment
by MMP inhibitors was found to be of low effectiveness against cancer metastases.

In order to gain a deeper understanding of amoeboid motion in complex
environments, we focused in this work on cellular navigation between
obstacles. We first examined the influence of noise on cellular
motion. In our stochastic compass model, the internal direction
(compass) of the cell reflects the external gradient, with some added
noise. The noise level scales inversely with the external gradient
strength. This model feature is based on experimental results
*REF*  *REF*, showing increasing CI with
increasing gradient steepness. Different noise levels can also result
from internal cellular characteristics. For example, normal cells
exhibit a stronger response (i.e. less noise, higher motility and
higher CI) to specific growth factors compared to cancerous cells of
the same cell line *REF*. This difference in gradient
sensing between normal and cancer cells can therefore influence their
ability to migrate, navigate and invade. By examining obstacle
circumvention of amoeboid cells we show that cells can easily bypass
obstacles of roughly their own size. This is a result of the noisy
extension-retraction dynamics of membrane protrusions, which is the
main characteristic of amoeboid motion.

To challenge the cell&apos;s navigation ability, we placed the cells in a
maze with contradictory cues. In most biological systems, the
signaling molecules can diffuse through small pores in the tissue,
while the larger cells need to bypass the obstacles, for example those
posed by the ECM, as described above. This is the rationale behind our
choice of a signal that can diffuse through the maze walls, rather
than a signal that can only diffuse via the maze openings. This is an
important point, as the independent signal and maze structure pose the
challenges of dead ends and corners, which the cell needs to overcome.
Conversely, when the signal diffuses only in the maze, the cell merely
needs to follow the chemoattractant concentration
*REF*. In some recent work of Sasai, a somewhat
similar challenge was posed, using a dead end that forced the cell to
change its direction. However, no long-term success rates were
measured, and the effects of memory were not investigated.

Our maze simulations show that adaptive noise is insufficient for
efficient and successful navigation. In the different maze/signal
configurations that we studied, success rates varied from 0% (two
cases) to 29.9%, which means that most of the cells were unable to
successfully exit (or solve) the maze. These low success rates suggest
the hypothesis that real cells have more &apos;intelligent&apos; ways to find
their way than by simply obeying the external signal. After adding a
simple memory effect by a secreted chemical, success rates in three
separate mazes rose to 72%, 76% and 99%, respectively. Our results
should be thought of as &apos;proof of concept&apos; that a simple self-employed
memory effect can indeed improve navigation ability significantly.
Since our maze was arbitrarily created, any similar maze with a
contradictory chemotactic signal should lead to qualitatively similar
results.

Secreted and diffusible chemicals can be found in many biological
systems, for example in quorum sensing bacteria. The bacteria secrete
pheromones that diffuse in the colony and are detected by the cells
themselves, initiating, for example, stress response in a crowded
colony. In our simulation the chemical similarly diffuses out of the
secreting cell and in the surrounding environment. While no specific
biological components can yet be identified with this hypothesized
memory mechanism, some cells are known to leave chemical traces behind
them as they move \[16,17\]. In *REF*, a migrating
neutrophil encountered a path bifurcation, with two different
chemoattractant levels. While the first neutrophil chose the path of higher concentration, the following neutrophil avoided that
path and surprisingly chose the other one. This behavior suggests that
the presence of a neutrophil masks the chemoattractant, thus
effectively redirects the second cell. In the case of metastasizing
cancer cells, a chemorepellent secreted by the cells may explain the
broad spatial distribution of cells that is typically seen in the
tissue. At the higher level of multi-cellular organisms, such as the
carabid beetle, conspecific avoidance mechanisms have been identified
*REF*. This mechanism is believed to lead to better
exploration of sparsely and randomly distributed prey resources.

The existence of cells coping with both chemical signaling and
environmental barriers was demonstrated in the embryo of medaka fish.
Macrophages were often constrained within relatively flat, peripheral
zones *REF*, possibly due to high tissue density or
adhesiveness. However, macrophages were able to respond to a wound
signal while still respecting the tissue barriers, by taking a longer
path through areas that were easier to invade. How the two
contradicting signals (moving towards the wound and dealing with
barriers) are balanced in this example is currently unknown.

Our predictions could easily be tested by creating maze-like
geometries and allowing cells to migrate therein. In fact, two very
recent reports have shown how this can be done. In
*REF*, a simple set of path bifurcations were presented
to neutrophils moving under a chemokine gradient. The cells were able
to successfully choose the short path. However, this study did not
investigate the case where the local chemical cues are insufficient
for proper navigation, and the cells indeed followed the steeper
gradient. The &apos;frustrated&apos; situation where this simple strategy would
lead to trapping is in our opinion more generic. In
*REF*, paths were etched in a collagen matrix as a
way of creating a more faithful in vitro analog of extracellular
matrix (see also *REF*); the authors then studied the
migratory capabilities of cancer cells in their construct. Again, the
questions of primary concern here were not specifically addressed, as
in this case there was no controlled gradient providing directional information.

To summarize, we studied amoeboid motion using a computational model
for cellular navigation. Our model shows that cells moving in this
manner can avoid being trapped at small but not large obstacles. We
then demonstrated that a simple marker strategy can improve navigation
in complex terrains. This realization provides important clues into
mechanisms that might be employed by real cells‟ migration in complex
environments as well as suggests that location memory should be
incorporated into robotic navigation designs. The results can be used
in the study of mammalian cell migration and cancer metastasis.

Methods

The model cell is represented by a list of connected nodes, with a set
of forces acting of them. The total force on each node involves
membrane protrusion force, cortical tension, friction and an effective
force resulting from a constant volume constraint. The exact form of
the different components is described in detail in Supporting Text S1,
and the used parameter values are given in Supporting Table S1. The
protruding force is localized at an active area on the membrane, which
we term &apos;patch&apos; (see *REF* for the biological context
of these patches). The patch is localized at the front of the cell
with respect to the external direction, as dictated by the chemoattractant gradient.

Once the total force acting on a node has been calculated, the
velocity change and the resulting translocation are simply calculated
using Newton‟s law.