Introduction


While AI systems have become core to many cognitive applications
today, they do not handle new scenarios that they are not trained on,
and they can repeatedly make the same mistakes. Even with retraining,
today&apos;s systems are prone to &quot;catastrophic forgetting&quot; when a new item
disrupts previously learned knowledge. Our goal is to address these
limitations by enabling AI system that can continually learn. Such a
capability requires the AI system to know what to learn and when, and
to utilize a memory subsystem to support unsupervised on-line
learning.


Learning multiple tasks in sequence remains a challenge because
standard AI system forget information related to previously learned
tasks. While there are numerous methods proposed for alleviating
catastrophic forgetting *REF*, most methods have not addressed
issues for scalability. For example, progressive and ensemble neural
networks *REF* adds incremental layers to leverage previously
learned features. However, such approaches grow the network parameters
substantially to accommodate the new information. A network pruning
step can be included, but such a process would be subject to
forgetting.


We are developing a lifelong reinforcement learning (RL) approach that
uses a memory subsystem to generate training samples for unsupervised
learning. As shown in Figure 1, the replay memory is integrated into
the RL framework, and can provide batch samples for the learning
agent. Using Deep-Q learning algorithm, for example, the agent can
recall a set of replay samples and retrain based on a new scenario.


Current RL approaches requires a large FIFO queue to store


sufficient training samples. Furthermore, for replay-based training,
there is additional requirement to know a-priori task labels to recall
the proper samples. As such, current replay approach for RL are not
scalable, and limiting, due to the requirement of large training
corpus for lifelong learning.


We propose the use of a generative memory component *REF* for the
replay memory to support scalability for lifelong learning. We show an
approach whereby the embedding of tasks and instances can be optimally
separately in latent space such that task labels are no longer
necessary for recall. We provide results for an example auto-encoder
style method for the generative memory.


Background and Biological Inspiration


Biological memory transfer is a complex sequence of dynamic processes,
with local and global synchronization patterns. These processes
support memories with flexibility in expression for future thinking,
foresight, planning, and creativity. It is well understood that memory
alleviates forgetting, and that memorizing all examples is not only
not scalable, but also not biologically principled.


It is understood that human memory does not offer perfect recall with
full details. We can also conjecture it is biologically intractable to
reactivate all memory cells for recall due to a finite
synaptic-bandwidths. We also note that all animals, particularly all
mammals, experience sleep, which consists of alternating sleep stages
with characteristic electrophysiological features, across the sleep
period. Sleep plays a critical role in supporting learning and
relearning through memory consolidation *REF*.


From such biological principles on memory transfer, we derive an AI
system with generative memory mechanism. Using replay and RL, we
support learning from salient memories for lifelong learning. Using a
generative memory, we address the ability to scale across lifelong
events. We formulate an encoding method for the generative memory to
separate the latent space such that learning can occur: (1) when the
tasks or behavior is not well-defined, (2) when the number of tasks is
unknown.


FIGURE


FIGURE


Experiments and Results


Our C-VAE is a generative memory with ability to learn concepts that
are different, and to reinforce those that are similar. Figure 4 shows
the ability to separate the latent space (e.g. z1 and z2 in Figure 3)
for each of the encoders in the C-VAE. Using the 𝜆 and 𝜃 parameters
(equation above) to guide the encoding, we arrive at a generative
memory system for lifelong RL, whereby the task embedding is
accomplished in an unsupervised manner. Our approach supports a
sub-linear growth in learning parameters and can support smooth
transition across the latent space during adaptation to surprises.


Generative Memory and Scalability


FIGURE


We first provide simulation results (Figure 2) to show the
relationship between memory size and catastrophic forgetting, which
motivates the need to have a scalable approach with sufficient memory
sizes. For small number of tasks and short durations, a small memory
works with simple uniform task sampling. However, larger sized
memories are needed when tasks and duration between tasks increases
*REF*. Memory trashing examples (Figure 2c) are indicative of
forgetting (even for a small number of tasks).


Using the MNIST dataset, we can show that the C-VAE and latent
separation in the encoding. For example, as shown in Figure 3, we can
show results where different output digits are encoded based on
training on the same input datasets. We can show various other results
whereby different lifelong RL behavior can be observed.


FIGURE


Conclusion


Memory is a key element of cognitive function and it is central to
continual learning system. Our approach uses a generative memory in
reinforcement learning framework to generate batch replay samples for
training. Such an approach offers robust lifelong learning mechanisms
to address issues with catastrophic forgetting. Our effort is focused
specifically on memory transfer with basis on current understanding of
biologically multi-stage memory consolidation.