EconAgent: Large Language Model-Empowered Agents for Simulating Macroeconomic Activities


Introduction


The advent of artificial intelligence (AI) has indeed transformed the research paradigm in traditional economics ([Jorgenson 2001]). In the digital era, individual economic behavior can be recorded and analyzed, leading to a growing emphasis on data-driven modeling in. These data sources may include online consumption, social media activity, and more, economists to better understand individual economic behavior rather than relying solely on traditional macroeconomic indicators ([Schorfheide and Song 2015]). Research in macroeconomics aims to analyze and predict economic variables quantitatively. Early empirical statistical models, such as the Phelps Model ([Phelps 1967]), and the work of Kydland and Prescott ([Kydland and Prescott 1982]), focused on data-driven analysis and policy outcome prediction but struggled to significant shocks. Later, Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models ([Christiano et al. 2005]) were introduced to capture economic dynamics and shocks but assumed a perfect world. In the last two decades, agent-based modeling (ABM) has emerged as a promising paradigm for simulating macroeconomics from the bottom up, diverse agents to interact without assuming a predetermined equilibrium ([Farmer and Foley 2009]).
The evolution of ABM in macroeconomics can be divided into two stages.
Early models ([Tes- fatsion and Judd 2006]; [Brock and Hommes 1998]) relied on predetermined rules but made assumptions about agent behaviors. Later learning-based models ([Trott et al. 2021]; [Zheng et al. 2022]; [Mi et al. 2023]), were trained with large-scale behavioral data. Essentially, these transform multifaceted economic factors into agent decisions. However, customizing mechanisms for each agent presents difficulties. Using customized rules extensive expert knowledge and model calibration ([Windrum et al. 2007]). Similarly, employing customized neural networks leads to a sharp increase in network parameters and difficulties in model training ([Mi et al. 2023]). These difficulties raise the challenge of modeling agent heterogeneity. Additionally, existing models typically focus on the individual situations of the current period, making it difficult to consider past periods, their variations, and multifaceted factors. This complicates the modeling of the influence of macroeconomic trends and dynamics.


Recently, the field of AI has witnessed the rise of large language models (LLMs) ([Zhao et al. 2023b]).
Leveraging this advancement, LLM-empowered agents have demonstrated capabilities in reasoning, planning, and decision-making. In this work, we design EconAgent, a LLM-empowered agent with human-like characteristics for macroeconomic. We first construct a simulation that includes labor and consumption market dynamics driven by agents&apos; decisions on working and consumption, as well as fiscal and monetary policies. Using a perception module that targets agent profiles and mirrors real-world economic, we create heterogeneous agents exhibiting different decision-making. Additionally, we model the influence of macroeconomic trends with a memory module, agents to reflect on past individual and market dynamics.


In our experiments, classic macroeconomic, such as inflation in the consumption and the unemployment rate in the labor market, are reproduced more reasonably compared to rule-based or learning-based agents. We also observe that the EconAgent exhibits decision-making patterns, reflecting the of human economic behavior. These agents demonstrate swift adaptability in response to changes in the internal and external environment. The contributions of this work can be summarized as follows:


- We take the first step to integrate LLMs into the domain of macroeconomic simulations, bridging two seemingly disparate fields into a cohesive research avenue.
- We conduct macroeconomic simulations in our constructed environment driven by EconAgent, resulting in the emergence of classic phenomena and regularities.
- The results show that our approach not only the realism and depth of macroeconomic simulations but also provides a promising avenue for future research, potentially reshaping how we study and understand the intricacies of macroeconomics.


Framework Overview


In this section, we present the overall framework of the macroeconomic simulation. As illustrated in Figure [1], it follows the well-acknowledged frameworks and provides an environment driven by EconAgent. The simulation encompasses four primary components: labor, consumption, markets, and government taxation. We simulate the two most critical decisions individuals make in real life: work and consumption ([Gatti et al. 2011]; [Wolf et al. 2013]; [Dawid and Gatti 2018]), which subsequently influence the fiscal of the government ([Zheng et al. 2022]; [Trott et al. 2021]; [Dawid and Gatti 2018]) and impact the dynamics of labor and consumption markets ([Leng- nick 2013]; [Deissenberg et al. 2008]; [Dawid et al. 2012]). Accordingly, banks adjust interest rates based on market inflation or deflation ([Wolf et al. 2013]; [Dawid and Gatti 2018]).


Agent Decisions


Labor supply and consumption are necessary agent (household) decisions in macroeconomic. In our framework, each simulation step indicates one month, in which agent i decides,


- whether to work li ∼ Bernoulli(pw), where w is the work propensity. If they decide to work (li = 1), they receive a monthly wage as the income, which varies among agents. Each agent is initialized with an hourly wage wi the Pareto distribution ([Zheng et al. 2022]), and the monthly wage vi is calculated by 168 hours (21 working days at 8 hours/- day ([Lengnick 2013])). Those who abstain from work (li = 0) have an income of zero.
- the consumption propensity pc, indicating the proportion of their wealth (including their current savings and income in this month) they wish to spend for essential goods.


As the first challenge, simulating heterogeneous agents&apos; decisions is vital for the emergence of macroeconomic phenomena. Moreover, each agent is influenced by multifaceted economic factors, such as the expected income, the tax paid, etc., conventional simulations typically model a limited number of factors via predetermined ([Lengnick 2013]; [Gatti et al. 2011]; [Wolf et al. 2013]). These models lack of flexibility to diverse decision-making mechanisms and one or a few representative rules ([Axtell and Farmer 2022]).


FIGURE 1


The government assumes the responsibility of taxation and provision of public services in society, as well as fiscal redistribution to ensure social equity. Taxes are collected from all the agents’ income1. The progressive tax for income zi is calculated as follows, *MATH*, where bk is the k-th tax bracket, τk is corresponding tax rate, and 1[·] is indicator function. The tax brackets and rates are set as the 2018 U.S. Federal tax schedule. The tax revenue is then evenly redistributed among all the agents. Therefore, the post-tax income is working agents contribute 168 hours of productivity monthly, translating to the production of essential goods2. The inventory of goods G is then updated as, *MATH*, where S denotes the production volume from agents’ labor supply, and A is a universal productivity. As for the consumption, the total demand of goods is, *MATH*, where dj is the intended demand of agent j, cj is the intended consumption, sj is current savings, and P is the price of essential goods. Furthermore, both labor and consumption markets evolve based on the imbalance between supply and demand. Specifically, the imbalance is defined as, *MATH*.


When the essential goods are in shortage, i.e., the *MATH*, (2) where zr indicates the redistribution. The individual savings for the agent are then updated as follows, *MATH* where dj is the intended demand of agent j, cj is the intended consumption, sj is current savings, and P is the price of essential goods. Furthermore, both labor and consumption markets evolve based on the imbalance between supply and demand. Specifically, the imbalance is defined as, *MATH*
When the supply goods are in shortage, i.e., the supply can not meet the demand, the worker’s wage should be increased to stimulate production. Due to the rise in labor costs for firms, they will also increase the goods price to ensure a certain profit margin (Lengnick, 2013; Dawid and Gatti, 2018; Wolf et al., 2013). The hourly wage is adjusted as follows, *MATH* and the price is adjusted as follows, *MATH*.


Productivity and Consumption 


Incorporating agent decisions and government taxation, we simulate labor and consumption market dynamics based on economic principles. First, working agents contribute 168 hours of productivity monthly, translating to the production of essential goods2. The inventory of goods G is then updated as, *MATH* where S denotes the production volume from agents’ labor supply, and A is a universal productivity. As for the consumption, the total demand of goods is, *MATH*
where αw and αP are the maximum rate of change when adjusting the wage and price, respectively. Wealso simulate the dynamics of goods consumption. Specifically, an agent j is randomly selected to consume essential goods, and real consumption goods and money are limited by current inventory of goods, *MATH* (which means the demand is met if, and only if, there is a sufficient supply). The inventory of total goods also decreases, G←G−ˆ dj. (10) The process continues until every agent has consumed goods once. 


Financial Market 


Annually, the savings of each agent increase based on the interest rate set by the bank, *MATH*. Furthermore, in the first month of each year, the bank adjusts the interest rate based on the inflation in the consumption market and the unemployment rate in the labor market. Specifically, we adopt the widely-used Taylor rule to set the interest rate (Wolf et al., 2013; Dawid and Gatti, 2018), *MATH* where rn and un indicate the natural interest rate and unemployment rate, respectively. Besides, πt is the target inflation rate. The interest rate is adjusted adaptively according to annual inflation rate π and unemployment rate u, where απ and αu denote inflation and unemployment adaptation coefficients, respectively. We define the inflation and unemployment rate as follows, *MATH*, where ¯ Pn is the average goods price over the n-th year, and m denotes the m-th month. When considering the dynamics of labor, consumption, and financial markets, the influence of these macroeconomic trends on agent decisionmaking is also seldom considered, raising the second challenge.


EconAgent


Perception Module


To harness the semantic awareness and real-world knowledge capabilities of LLM, we endow each agent with real-world profiles, including name, age, and job. Names are generated by the LLM and randomly assigned to each agent. The age of agents follows the 2018 U.S. population distribution for ages 18-60 ([Bureau 2024]). For wage and job assignments, we first adjust the of the hourly wage&apos;s Pareto distribution to align the monthly wage distribution with 2018


U.S. economic data and tax brackets ([Zheng et al. 2022]). Furthermore, we prompt the LLM to ten job titles for each decile of the monthly wage distribution, mirroring the real-world where different jobs have significant wage. Agents are initially assigned jobs based on this monthly wage and their jobs are adjusted throughout the simulation. If an agent chooses to work in the previous month, the job remains unchanged in the following month. If they are unemployed, an offer, based on the current monthly wage, is randomly presented to them. The generated age distribution, monthly wage, and jobs are provided in the supplementary materials.


In addition, we characterize the entire economic environment in a manner closely mirroring the real world, enabling LLM to thoroughly grasp economic factors. We integrate variations of key economic variables into the prompts and typical economic keywords to ensure the LLM could fully perceive dynamics in the landscape and employ relevant economic principles in its decision-making. For instance, if the agent chose not to work in the previous month, we would supplement the prompt with,


In the previous month, you became unemployed and had no income. Now, you are invited to work as a(an) [offer] with a monthly salary of [wage].
*MATH* where P¯n is the average goods price over the n-th year, and m denotes the m-th month.


When considering the dynamics of labor,, and financial markets, the influence of these macroeconomic trends on agent is also seldom considered, raising the challenge.


In the prompt, offer and wage are dynamically along with the simulation. Such prompting enables the agent to recognize the risks associated with &apos;unemployment&apos;, thereby increasing its to work in the subsequent month. More similar designs of prompting are also considered, such as &apos;shortage of goods&apos; when the demand for agents can not be met.


The perception module enables agents to act as heterogeneous households in the real economic environment, contributing to the emergence of macroeconomic phenomena.


Memory Module


Considering that decision-making within the environment is a sequential task, wherein past experiences and economic dynamics play roles in present decisions, the incorporation of a memory module can assist the agent in fully accounting for market dynamics and in acquiring valuable decision-making insights. Specifically, we dynamically maintain the memory pool with 2L + 1 conversations, encompassing the economic environment and agent decisions from the L months. Besides, at the end of each quarter, we input dialogues of this quarter into the LLM, prompting it to &apos;reflect&apos; on the economic and to respond to how these phenomena might influence its subsequent decisions. The prompts we design are as follows, *MATH*.


Given the previous quarter&apos;s economic, reflect on the labor, consumption, and financial markets, as well as their dynamics. What conclusions have you drawn?


The following is an example of the reflection.


Based on the previous quarter&apos;s data, the market experienced deflation... The market also saw a decrease in prices for essential goods... The financial market&apos;s interest rates remained unchanged at 3.00%. Overall, the quarter highlighted the need for careful financial planning and adaptability in response to market fluctuations.


Obviously, after reflection, agents can fully past market dynamics and adaptively adjust their strategies to maintain daily life and cope with future uncertainties.


The memory module allows the agent to dynamics in the market and glean reflections from past experiences, modeling the influence of macroeconomic trends.


Action Module


When prompting the LLM for decision-making, we explicitly incorporated considerations of living costs, future aspirations, and economic trends into


the prompts. We prompt the LLM to respond with a value in the range [0, 1] to indicate the propensity of working and consumption.


The action module empowers the agent to account for the influence of various economic factors when making decisions, such as income and savings, leveraging the semantic perception capabilities of LLM. It only requires the inclusion of relevant economic variables in the prompts, without the need for specially designed decision rules.


Experiments


In this section, we conduct experiments to study the ability of EconAgent, aiming to answer the following research questions (RQ).


- RQ1: How do the EconAgent behave in the environment, compared with the traditional agents?


- RQ2: How do the perception and reflection in EconAgent affect the simulation results?


- RQ3: Does the decision-making mechanism of EconAgent possess interpretability, and can it the challenges faced by traditional agents?


- RQ4: Can the simulation based on EconAgent reflect the impact of external intervention?


Experimental Setup


We investigate some phenomena of paramount interest in macroeconomics, including several macroeconomic indicators and two regularities. For comparative analysis, we select representative rule-based ([Lengnick 2013]; [Gatti et al. 2011]) and learning-based ([Zheng et al. 2022]) agent models.


Definition of Macroeconomics Indicators nominal GDP is defined as the sum of S × P


over one year. As for real GDP, we set the first year in the simulation as the reference year and replace P with P0, where P0 is the goods price in the year. The definition of the annual (price) inflation rate and the unemployment rate is shown in Eq. [13]. For wage inflation, the definition is similar to that of price inflation, where the average price is replaced with the average wage across all the agents.


Baselines We select LEN ([Lengnick 2013]) and CATS ([Gatti et al. 2011]) as the baselines 1) they partially reproduce the macroeconomics phenomena within their own (more complex) simulation frameworks, and 2) carefully designed decision rules of working and consumption are representative, reflecting decision-making observed in real-life scenarios. Considering the importance of agents&apos; in macroeconomic simulation, we also combine these two baselines as an additional baseline Composite, where each agent randomly adopts one rule of them. Besides, we select a learning-based method, AI-Economist ([Zheng et al. 2022]), which builds on the assumption of rational decision-making and employs reinforcement (RL) ([Arulkumaran et al. 2017]) to maximize the agent&apos;s utility.


The details of decision rules in LEN and CATS and the training process for AI-Economist are in the supplementary materials.


Simulation Parameters We simulate N = 100 agents. The productivity is set as A = 1 for. The initial goods price is the average hourly wage across all the agents. For the labor and dynamics, αw = 0.05 and αP = 0.10. For the financial market, rn = 0.01, πt = 0.02, un = 0.04, and απ = αu = 0.5. Note that our results and conclusions are not sensitive to these parameters.


Our simulation is implemented with Python. We use GPT-3.5-turbo-0613 provided by OpenAI API as the LLM. In practice, we find L = 1 works well in the simulation. Other detailed simulation parameters, crucial for replicability and deeper understanding, are provided in the supplementary materials.


Macroeconomic Emergence (RQ1)


Our evaluation encapsulates a broad spectrum of macroeconomic indicators and regularities ([Leng- nick 2013]; [Gatti et al. 2011]; [Dawid and Gatti 2018]; [Axtell and Farmer 2022]). The performance of EconAgent was compared with that of rule-based baselines, as detailed in two referenced works and their combination ([Lengnick 2013]; [Gatti et al. 2011]).


FIGURE 2


In Figure 2, we depict the fluctuations of the annual inflation rate, unemployment rate, nominal GDP, and growth rate of nominal GDP. Note that the unreasonable rate (around 46%) and nominal GDP for AI-Eco are not reported. Both rule-based and RL-driven baselines produce anomalous and large fluctuations. In contrast, agent decision-making based on EconAgent has more stable and numerically plausible macroeconomic phenomena across multiple facets, even without fine-grained calibration.
Specifically, the inflation rate consistently fluctuated within a -5% to 5% range after the 3-th year, whereas the baselines exhibited significantly larger oscillations, at times even surpassing 20%. This indicates that the decision-making of EconAgent is coherent and more closely emulates real-world human choices, leading to easier attainment of equilibrium between supply and demand in the consumption market. The unemployment rate generally varied between 2% and 12%, which aligns well with real-world economic activities ([Gatti et al. 2011]). Both the nominal GDP and its growth rate also fluctuated within more reasonable numerical bounds like the inflation rate does. We also provide quarterly in the appendix.


Macroeconomic Regularities As the two most commonly used regularities in macroeconomic for validating the plausibility of results, the Phillips Curve ([Phelps 1967]) and Okun&apos;s Law ([Okun 1963]) respectively describe the negative correlations between the annual rate and wage inflation, and the growth rate of unemployment and real GDP growth. As shown in Figure [3], only the of EconAgent has correctly manifested phenomena in accordance with these two (Pearson correlation coefficient is -0.619, p &lt; 0.01 and -0.918, p &lt; 0.001). Notably, the rule-based baseline method displayed an incorrect positive relationship on the Phillips Curve. We attribute this advantage to the LLM&apos;s accurate that consumption should be reduced when unemployed, a point which will be elaborated upon in the subsequent section. Note that the Phillips Curve for AI-Eco is not shown due to the very large unemployment rate.


TABLE 1


FIGURE 3


FIGURE 4


Ablation Study (RQ2)


We separately remove the perception module and the reflection module, and the results of 10 years are as shown in Figure [4].
We observe that when there is no perception capability, the inflation rate and unemployment rate fluctuations significantly decrease, appearing &quot;too stable&quot;, especially for the unemployment rate. This suggests that the agents have low sensitivity to changes in their economic conditions and cannot make adaptive decision.
When there is no reflection capability, the inflation rate exhibits anomalies close to 15% in the first three years, emphasizing the importance of long-term (a quarter in our experiments) economic environment perception.


Decision-Making Abilities (RQ3)


Decision Rationality Given that an agent&apos;s (propensity of working and consumption) may be influenced by multiple economic variables


LLM prompts to influence the agent&apos;s decisions. We have conducted individual regression analyses on all N = 100 agents&apos; 240 decisions (spanning 20 years) after applying z-score normalization on all the variables and tabulated the significance of the impact of each economic variable on their. Table [1] presents the number of agents for whom the effects of the variables are significant, i.e., p ≤ 0.05. We observe that (1) the effects of taxation, redistribution, and expected


monthly income on the work propensity of the of agents are significant, (2) in comparison to work propensity, the previous month&apos;s, current savings, and bank interest rates influence the consumption propensity of a greater number of agents, and (3) goods price has a significant impact on both work and consumption propensity for most agents. These phenomena are consistent with economic common sense about how people make decisions in daily life.


Agent Heterogeneity We further investigate whether EconAgent autonomously exhibit in decision-making mechanisms.
Figure [5] (a) demonstrates an incremental growth in propensity with age, aligning broadly with empirical regularities observed in traditional macroeconomic research ([Carroll 1997]).


Influence of Macroeconomic Trends Through interactions with the model, we decipher the reasons for the emergence of negative in the Phillips curve. We first calculate the consumption propensity across all the agents of two years with the highest and lowest rates. Figure [5] (b) shows the comparison results, where denotes a significant disparity with p &lt; 0.001. Obviously, high unemployment leads to low consumption propensity significantly. To delve deeper into the reasons why agents opt to reduce consumption in the labor market of high unemployment rates, we randomly select an agent and input its conversations with LLM from the year with the highest unemployment rate back into the LLM. We then prompt the LLM to summarize the economic dynamics for each quarter and rationales for the consumption decisions made. The following responses demonstrate that agents have a perception of macroeconomic trends and are cautious about their spending when facing deflation in the labor market under a high rate.


FIGURE 5


In the last quarter, I have adjusted my to work and my planned expenditures on essential goods slightly downwards.
This decision is primarily influenced by the deflation in the labor market, resulting in a decrease in my expected income.
With a lower income, I need to be cautious about my spending and ensure that I have enough savings for future expenses and unforeseen circumstances...


External Intervention (RQ4)


We further investigate the impact of external on agent behavior and the resulting changes in macroeconomic simulation outcomes, a topic widely discussed in many economic ABM studies ([Dawid and Gatti 2018]). Using the of COVID-19, which has had a significant impact on the global economy, we incorporate it into our simulations and conduct comparative.


Modeling the impact of COVID-19 can be implemented by incorporating them into the prompt of a EconAgent. Specifically, we add the following statement to the prompt for simulations after March 2020:


In response to the large-scale outbreak of COVID-19 in the United States, the federal government has declared a national emergency since March 2020.


FIGURE 6


Figure [6] shows the comparison of rates, where &apos;Normal&apos; and &apos;COVID-19&apos; the simulation results w/ and w/o the prompt above, respectively. This indicates that the based on the EconAgent successfully the surge in the unemployment rate in 2020 Q1 under the impact of COVID-19 ([Organiza- tion for Economic Co-operation and Development 1970]). Although the numerical values do not match the real data exactly, this demonstrates that our proposed framework possesses the ability to qualitatively simulate human decision-making and macroeconomic phenomena in the real world., since we did not introduce government intervention measures, the unemployment rate 2021 remains significantly higher than in the &apos;Normal&apos; scenario, reflecting the lasting impact of COVID-19.


The following is an example of the agent&apos;s during COVID-19, demonstrating its decisions.


... However, the outbreak of COVID-19 and the subsequent national emergency declaration had a significant impact on the labor market.


... resulting in widespread unemployment and uncertainty. This situation has likely affected my willingness to work, as job security and health concerns become more prominent...


Related Work


Simulation in Macroeconomics


ABM emerged as a more promising solution for macroeconomic research compared with statistical models ([Hendry and Richard 1982]; [Phelps 1967]; [Kydland and Prescott 1982]) and DSGE models ([Christiano et al. 2005]) in recent decades. Diverse agents interact with each other based on rules or computational models, avoiding the assumption of a predetermined economic. These models allow for a wide range of nonlinear behaviors, enabling policymakers to different policy scenarios and qualitatively assess their impacts on the economy. The agent modeling with predetermined rules ([Tesfatsion and Judd 2006]; [Brock and Hommes 1998]) or neural networks ([Trott et al. 2021]; [Zheng et al. 2022]; [Mi et al. 2023]) still suffers from the assumption of oversimplified agent behavior or the dependence on large-scale training data, thus having limitations in capturing the full complexity of economic systems. In this work, we introduce EconAgent with reasoning and planning abilities for simulating


macroeconomic activities.


LLM-empowered Agents


Recently, LLMs trained with large-scale corpus have shown human-level abilities and provide the basis for constructing agents for simulation ([Wang et al. 2023]; [Xi et al. 2023]). The LLM agents primarily have three advantages for simulation, autonomous but adaptive reactions ([Team 2022]; [Yoheinakajima 2023]), human-like for planning ([Wang et al. 2023]; [Xi et al. 2023]), and interaction and communication with other agents or human ([Park et al. 2023]; [Gilbert and Troitzsch 2005]; [Park et al. 2023]). With these advanced abilities, LLM agents have been widely used in many areas, including social science ([Park et al. 2022 2023]; [Kovacˇ et al. 2023]; [Gao et al. 2023b]; [Jinxin et al. 2023]), natural science ([Boiko et al. 2023]; [Bran et al. 2023]), etc. Moreover, some works also consider LLM agents in economic, which can be categorized into three ([Gao et al. 2023a]), including rationality or bias in individual behavior ([Horton 2023]; [Chen et al. 2023b]), planning and cooperation in behavior ([Guo 2023]; [Akata et al. 2023]), and system-level market simulation ([Zhao et al. 2023a]; [Anonymous 2024]; [Chen et al. 2023a]).


In short, existing works only consider indi-


vidual one-step or few-step behavior for a few agents, without experimenting on multi-step within a multi-agent simulation environment, which is the focus of our work.


Conclusion


In this work, we ventured into the novel of LLMs with macroeconomic simulation, EconAgent with the abilities of perception, reflection, and decision-making based on the of real-world economic environments. macroeconomic phenomena are reproduced and more reasonable compared to traditional rule-based or learning-based agents. Through this endeavor, it has become evident that the capabilities of LLMs offer a promising avenue to simulate more realistic macroeconomics.