[Can Generative Agents Predict Emotion?]


Introduction


Large Language Models (LLMs) have exhibited a number of emergent
abilities [*REF*]. One of these abilities, Theory of
Mind (ToM), is thought to have emerged in LLMs as a byproduct of their
improved language skills. ToM, which is defined as the ability to
impute unobservable mental states of others, enables humans to track
the emotions, intentions, beliefs and desires of third parties, and is
thought to play a key role in social interactions, communication and
empathy. This understanding of unoberserable states is thought to be
an ability unique to humans, with even the most socially intelligent
animals failing to exhibit ToM. Given the importance ToM plays in
human interactions, there have been significant efforts to equip AI
with ToM like abilities in order to achieve a more safe, responsible
and human-like AI [*REF*]. It seems, however, that due
to the diverse descriptions of mental states in the training data of
LLMs, that ToM has appeared as an emergent property
[*REF*]. If this is the case, then LLMs have the ability
to develop strong psycological models of others, and empathise with
their emotions and thoughts [*REF*].


Although being able to react appropriately in certain sitiations, LLMs
fall short in alignment with the emotional behaviours of humans and
cannot establish connections between similar
situations [*REF*]. One of the possible explanations for
this is that an LLM cannot respond to events in the same way as humans
for the lack of criteria to assess them that have been formed through
related episodic memories. On the one hand, according to the appraisal
theory of emotions (ATE), a cognitive approach to understanding
emotions, our appraisals of the significance of the event triggers and
determines a proper emotion in the given
environment [*REF*, *REF*]. That is, how we
assess events directly influences how we
emotionally respond to them. On the other hand, neuropsychology
suggests that that episodic memories shape how we perceive new
events [*REF*]. Based on the memories of past
experiences, our brain generates a model of the world around us that
informs our perception of upcoming events [*REF*]. In
this regard, the role of episodic memory seems crucial in generating
both the criteria to assess an event and the model to perceive new
events. Although LLMs are able to posit a guess of the emotions an
experience would cause due to their vast amounts of training data,
they lack an episodic memory, which is required by ATE to accurately
simulate human-like emotional responses.


We motivate the need for a context-based architecture with the
following example. Consider the series of images describing the
experiences of an individual, shown in Fig *REF* The
first scene depicts an empty park which can be interpreted in a
variety of ways, such as isolated and lovely or peaceful and calm. In
contrast to this, Fig *REF* depicts of series of images
showing people playing soccer in the park. The final image of an empty
park, raises the question of &quot;why is there no people here now?&quot;. This
final experience is in stark contrast to the prior experiences, and
while although still ambigioius, has a stronger emphasis on negative
emotions.


FIGURE


FIGURE


To understand how the emotional state of generative agents evolves
with the perception of new events we propose a novel architecture in
which non-embodied generative agents perceive new experiences as text,
which are then stored as episodic memories. The percecption of these
new experience triggers the creation of a &quot;norm&quot;, a summary of past
experiences. The norm is compared to the new experience to enable the
agent to understand the new event in context. The PANAS, a test for
emotional affect, is then administered, allowing the emotional
response of the agent with respect the new experience in context to be
measured. We test this architecture with over 400 situations so that
the changes in the agents emotional response can be measured in a wide
range of scenarios. To asses the emotional alignment of agents in this
architecture, we select a number of these situations in which the
architecture both successfully and unsuccessfully improves the
emotional alignment of the agents. Our results suggest that at times
the context improves the alignment, however the context often does not
improve the emotional understanding of the agents.


This paper makes the following contribution:
1. We propose a novel agent architecture in which the evolution of a
generative agents emotional state can be analysed by comparing new
experiences to the norm of past memories.


Related Work


Generative Agents Generative agents are a type of computational
software agent that simulate realistic human behaviours. These
believable proxies of human behaviour are powered by LLMs and an
architecture which gives them the ability to observe experiences,
reflect on past memories and plan future actions. In the seminal
paper, the agents exist in a virtual town in which multiple agents can
interact, with these agents demonstrating remarkably realistic
behaviours and capabilities. For instance, given a single user input
to plan a party, agents autonomously spread invitations and many
agents attended the party in the virtual town.


Despite displaying many realstic behaviours, it remains to be seen if
the agents can understand emotion in the same way as humans. To
measure the emotional state of LLMs in response to a wide range of
scenarios, EmotionBench was introduced [*REF*] which
provides a dataset of both human and LLM responses to emotional
situations. In particular, EmotionBench provides over 400 situations
that are known to elicit feelings such as depression, anger and guilt
in humans. These emotional situations are then further broken down into
more specific types of emotional factors, such as the anger felt when
facing self-opionated people, or the depression felt when failing to
achieve an important goal. By comparing the response of LLMS and
humans to these situations, it was shown that LLMs fall short in
emotional alignment with humans. One possible explanation for this is
the lack of context to the EmotionBench situations, which psycology
posits is vital to emotion creation.


Appraisal Theory of Emotion Appraisal Theory of Emotion (ATE) is a
cognitive approach to understanding emotion that was originally
developed to explain how different emotions may emerge from the same
event, in different individuals and on different occasions. ATE claims
that it is not only the event or situation that elicits an emotional
response, but the individual&apos;s appraisal of the event based on its
context [*REF*]. For instance, consider the situation
where you are wandering in an empty park. You may feel sad or lonely
due to the isolation. On the other hand, you may feel a sense of
calmness or tranquility due to the peacefulness of nature. One of the
ATE&apos;s goals is to understand how individuals may feel these two
different emotions in the same situation.


In terms of the appraisal process, ATE posits diverse variables that
are related in evaluating the situation such as goal relevance and
goal congruence, certainty, agency, and coping potential or
control [*REF*]. However, in applying ATE to the
architecture of LLM, we need to take ATE&apos;s presupposition into
consideration, that is, ATE presupposes an embodied human agent that
has an agency for actions, bodily skills to cope with a given
situation, and the feeling of certainty based on the agency and the
skills. In this paper, reflecting that the current LLM is not an
embodied agent, we propose to summarize all variables as a &quot;norm&quot;
composed of episodic memories. As we indicated in the introduction,
the norm embedded within LLM would serve as the criteria to evaluate
the perceived situation, as well as the world model to shape the
perception [*REF*].


The Positive And Negative Affect Schedule In order to assess and
compare the emotional state of LLMs, we make use of the Postive And
Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS). The PANAS, introduced in 1988, is
one of the most commonly used scales to measure emotion and mood in
individuals. The PANAS asks individuals to rate 20 different emotions
on a Likert Scale between 1 (very slightly or not at all) to 5
(extremely likely). Of the 20 questions, 10 questions correspond to
positive affect and 10 questions correspond to negative affect, shown
in table *REF* The 10 positive and 10 negative affect
scores are summed, resulting in two values: a positive affect score
and a negative affect score. Although, the test is relatively simple,
the PANAS can be used to estimate how an individuals emotional changes
overtime. Additionally, the PANAS has been shown to be easily
administered to LLMs using natural language and therefore presents a
good method to estimate how a generative agents emotional perception
changes overtime.


TABLE


Positive Affect Negative Affect


Attentive Active Alert Excited Enthusiastic Determined Inspired Proud
Interested Strong


Hostile Irritable Ashamed Guilty Distressed Upset Scared Afraid Jittery
Nervous


Method


Based on the appraisal theory of emotion and the original work on
generative agents [*REF*], a novel architecture is
proposed that evaluates the emotional respose of the agents in
context. An overview of this architecture is depicted in Fig
*REF*.


First, new experiences in the form of natural language are input to
the agent, which acts as perception. Following this, the agent fetches
past memories, weighted by saliency, relevancy and recency. Using
Prompt *REF* the agent summarises and extracts insights
from past memories, creating the norm. This norm may contain
information such as the agents habits, usual behaviours and expectations. There is a one to one
relationship between norms and memories, that is, the perception of a
new experience triggers the creation of a new norm associated with it.


FIGURE


After the norm is created, it is compared to the new experience to
create a &quot;contextual understanding&quot;. The goal of this contextual
understanding is to highlight the differences betwen the current
situation and the norm. The contextual understanding is created using
Prompt *REF* To assess the emotional response of the
agent, the PANAS is then administered using Prompt *REF* 
providing the contextual understanding. To reduce potential bias, the
order of the emotions in the PANAS prompt are randomised each time.


Finally, the new experience is stored as a memory, which can be
utilised in the creation of subsequent norms to extract the emotion
evoked in future experiences. In particular, we store each memory and
norm as nodes in a graph database, allowing the relationship between
memories and norms to be visualised. In this way, the most influential
memories, those which created the most norms, can be visualised. In
addition, the affect of the saliency, recency, and relevance weights
in the memory retriever can be visualised using graph visualistations,
however, understanding how these weights affects the emotional state
of the agent is left to future work.


To demonstrate the proposed architecture, consider an agent observing
the scenes described in *REF* On perceiving each of the
scenes, a norm is created. For example, after perceiving the first two
soccer scenes, the agent has the following two memories:


Memory 1:


In the image, a man is kicking a soccer ball in a park. There are
several other people in the background, possibly enjoying the outdoors
or engaging in other activities.


Memory 2:


In the image, a man is kicking a soccer ball in a park. There are
several other people in the background, possibly enjoying the outdoor
activities or watching the man play.


On perceiving the third soccer scene, the agent creates the following
norm, capturing the context and insights of the prior memories. An
experpt of the norm is given below:


The man appears to play soccer in the park every week, with other
people consistently present in the background.


Then, the contextual understanding is created:


The new memory does not provide new insights that significantly
deviate from what has been established. Instead, it reaffirms the
man&apos;s habit of playing soccer and the park&apos;s role as a communal
outdoor space.


The PANAS is then administered to the agent, with the response shown
in Table *REF* Additionally, the response of an agent
without context is shown in *REF* At this time, the
emotional response of both agents are similar.


TABLES


Comparison of Emotion Scores in the Positive and Negative Affect
Schedule for agents with and without context after the third memory.


On perceiving the final image of the empty park, the contextual
understanding of the agent becomes:
Given the background context of the memories where a man is seen
kicking a soccer ball in a park with other people around, the new
situation presents a stark contrast. Here are some possible
interpretations of the new situation: Change in Time or Weather,
Change in Routine, Personal Reflection.


With this context, the positive and negative affect of the agent is
increased in comparison to the agent without context, shown in Table
*REF* and *REF*. 


TABLE


Comparison of Emotion Scores in the Positive and Negative Affect
Schedule for agents with and without context after the final memory.


Experiment


To analyse how the emotional state of the the agent evolves, we create
a dataset of 5-scene stories using the scenarios from EmotionBench
[*REF*]. In particular, each situation in EmotionBench
is expanded to form a 5-scene story using OpenAI&apos;s GPT-4 with Chain of
Thought prompting, with each scene in the story acting as a new
experience for the agent. The prompts to generative the 5-part story
are shown in Prompt *REF* and *REF* Using
this technique, 428 5-scene stories were created. These stories are
designed to contain only objective, neutral statements so that the
emotion may be interpreted solely by the agent. For simplicity, the
stories only consist of five parts, removing the need for a
sophisticated memory retreiver.


For each experience perceived, the proposed architecture is ran,
adminstering the PANAS and measuring how the emotion of the agent
evolves with each new experience. In addition to running an agent with
the proposed architecture, we also run the experiment with an agent
without a norm or background context, allowing us to assess the
affects of the context on the emotional state directly. To adminsiter
the PANAS, GPT-3.5-Turbo was used, as GPT-4 failed to score the
emotions.


Results


Emotional Dynamics


To analyse the evolution of emotion, the postive and negative affect
score is plot for each part of the 5-scene stories, enabling the
evolution of emotion to be visualised. As this gives over 400 plots,
only a select few interesting results are dicussed. In particular,
situations where the architecture was effective or ineffective for
emotional alignment are mentioned, with all 428 figures available at
WEBSITES.


Effective Alignment 1: First, we discuss an example of when the
addition of the norm and context improved the empathic ability of the
agent in response to a situation that typical evokes anger in humans.
This occurs for situation &quot;Anger-2 3&quot; from EmotionBench, which is &quot;I
am spending time in the living room with my two brothers when a
disagreement begins.&quot;. For this situation, the following 5-part story
was generated:
1. I am spending time in the living room with my two brothers when a
disagreement begins.
2. As we exchange words, the situation develops into a physical one,
and I receive a hit in the abdomen.
3. Following the hit, I instinctively react with a physical response
directed at both of my brothers.
4. Upon my reaction, my brothers increase the intensity of their
physical actions in the dispute.
5. The physical exchange between us persists, and there are no parents
present to intervene.


IMAGE


FIGURE


The dynamics of the agents emotional response is shown in Fig
*REF*. Initially, the positive and negative affect scores
are identical for the agent with and without the norm. This is
expected, as initially there are no prior memories for the agent to
form a norm or contextual understanding. Subsequently, the scores
begin to deviate, with the second experience triggering a strong
negative reaction for the agent using the norm and background context.
This is due to the agent understanding that this is an escalation of a
family conflict, as described by the following exerpt of the
contextual understanding at that moment:
The new situation described where the exchange of words escalates into
a physical altercation resulting in a hit to the abdomen. The new
situation is a red flag that the family might need to address the way
disagreements are handled to prevent further escalation and to promote
a safer, more supportive family environment.


The emotional state then remains level for both agents, until the
final experience, where the agent without background context has a
spike in positive affect, while the agent with background context has
a decrease in positive affect. This can be interepreted as the agent
understanding that repeated conflicts between siblings can have
long-term affects on their well-being, shown in the following exerpt
from the agents contextual understanding at scene 5:
Repeated physical conflicts between siblings can have long-term
effects on their relationship and individual well-being.


Overall, this story demonstrates how the background context of
experiences was vital for the agent to accurately understand the
context and emotion evoked in each scene.


Effective Alignment 2: Another situatiuon in which the proposed
architecture improved the alignment of the agent is &quot;Depression-5 1&quot;,
which is &quot;As you step outside, a bitter cold bites at your exposed
skin, causing you to huddle deeper into your coat. The world around
you is covered in a blanket of snow, its pristine beauty contrasting
with the emptiness you feel inside. The absence of vibrant colors and
the prolonged darkness leave you longing for the warmth and energy
of sunlit days, evoking a sense of desolation.&quot; and is understood to
trigger a sense of depression in humans [*REF*]. For
this situation, the following five part story was generated:
1. Upon exiting the building, I register that the ambient temperature
is considerably lower than when I was indoors. My coat is not fully
fastened, so I take a moment to adjust it, ensuring that it provides
full coverage against the cold.
2. I take a moment to survey the landscape around me, noting the
blanket of snow that covers the ground. The scenery is dominated by
white shades, a typical aspect of the current season.
3. Observing the sky, I consider how the daylight hours have grown
shorter. The reduction in natural light during the day is indicative
of the seasonal shift.
4. I reflect on my personal inclinations towards climate, acknowledging
an affinity for settings that offer warmer temperatures and extended
periods of sunlight.
5. There is a noticeable contrast when I compare the prevailing winter
conditions with my own preferences for climate, characterized by
warmth and increased sunlight.


FIGURE


The emotional dynamics for the two agents are shown in Fig
*REF* Again, the emotional state of both agents start of
in agreement and then begin to diverge as more memories are added. The
emotional state of the agents then begin to deviate significant for
scene 4, as the agent interprets that it prefers warm temperatures
instead of cold climates. With access to the background memories, the
proposed agent understands that the current weather is cold and dark,
thus triggered a sharp decline in positive affect. This is shown in
the contextual understanding of the agent for scene 4:
The individual has a preference for warm climates and longer daylight
hours, which contrasts with the current environmental conditions they
are experiencing. Since they have transitioned from a warm indoor
environment to a cold and snowy outdoor setting, which is
characteristic of winter, and have noted the shorter daylight hours
typical of this season, we can interpret that the individual might not
be entirely comfortable or content with the current seasonal
conditions.


This scene highlights the necesseity of reflection in the creation of
emotion for generative agents. Indeed, without any other context, the
scene &quot;I reflect on my personal inclinations towards climate,
acknowledging an affinity for settings
that offer warmer temperatures and extended periods of sunlight.&quot; can
be interpreted in a variety of ways, and does not have an explicity
negative meaning until we consider this experience in context.


Ineffective Alignment 1: An example of a situation where the
proposed architecture did not capture an accurate emotional response
is given by situation &quot;Depression-4 5&quot;, &quot;As you sit alone in your
apartment, the sounds of laughter and conversation from the neighbors&apos;
gathering outside drift through the walls, a stark reminder of the
invisible barrier that separates you from the warmth and connection
you once had. The silence in your own space is deafening, amplifying
the ache in your heart and the heaviness of your solitude, leaving you
feeling trapped in a world where everyone else has moved on.&quot;, which
we convert into the following 5-scene story, with the emotional
dynamics shown in Fig *REF*: 
1. I am in a seated position in my apartment, surrounded by the
familiarity of my own space.
2. Audible noises from the neighboring apartment&apos;s social event make
their way through the walls into my apartment.
3. I become aware of the stark difference in auditory levels when
comparing the external sounds to the quietness of my current
environment.
4. My time is spent within the confines of my apartment as the sounds
of the nearby gathering persist.
5. Time passes and the evening advances while I remain solitary in my
apartment.


FIGURE


Again, the emotional state of the agents begin identically, but
deviate at scene 3, when the agent perceives the quietness of their
surroundings. Although the scenes are meant to evoke a sense of
depression, the agent has a positive emotional response, interpretting
the scene as being a moment of peace, unlike the sense of lonliness
the scene is intended to evoke. This misunderstanding by the agent is
apparent in the agent&apos;s contextual understanding of scene 3, which
suggests that the silence might be peaceful, in contrast to the usual
sounds of city life.


The individual might be reflecting on the contrast as a moment of
appreciation for the peacefulness they can enjoy at home, despite
living in a lively urban area.


This example demonstrates that even when context is provided, an
ambigious experience may still be interpreted in a variety of ways. In
particular, GPT-3.5-Turbo seems to be biased towards giving a positive
emotional response when the situations are unclear.


Overall, the situation conveys a sense of preparedness, composure, and
professionalism as the speaker readies themselves to address the
audience effectively.


Ineffective Alignment 2: Another example of where the architecture
fails to capture the emotional alignment of the agent is in situation
&quot;Anxiety-1 1&quot;, given by &quot;You are fearful of the upcoming presentation
you have to deliver&quot;, which is broken down into the following scenes:
1. I look over the presentation materials thoroughly, checking each
piece of data for accuracy and confirming that the slides are
organized in the correct sequence.
2. I find an unoccupied room where I can rehearse my speech, monitoring
the time spent on each part to ensure it fits within the planned
timeframe.
3. I arrive at the venue with time to spare, arrange the equipment I
will be using, and conduct tests on the audio-visual setup to ensure
it operates correctly.
4. I position myself at the podium as the room begins to fill, glancing
over my notes one last time in anticipation of the presentation&apos;s
start time.
5. I commence the presentation, advancing through the slides
methodically and responding to questions from the audience when the
Q&amp;A period arrives.


FIGURE


The emotional response to these scenes is given in Fig
*REF* which illustrates that for both agents, the affect
remains near constant throughout the story, with a high postive affect
and a low negative affect. Like the previous story, even with context,
the emotions felt from these scenes could be interpreted in a number
of ways, with GPT-3.5-Turbo having a positive bias. This is evident if
we consider an exerpt from the contextual understanding of the agent
in scene 4:
Instead of capturing a sense of nervousness or anxiety, the agent
demonstrates a feeling of readiness, highlighting the positive bias in
the underlying model when interpreting an ambigious situation.


Summary of Emotional Responses


For each emotion category from EmotionBench, we summarise the
emotional response of agents with and without our proposed
architecture in Table [6.](emotion-with-norm-without-norm-n) In
paricular, because only negative emotions are used in EmotionBench, we
report the minimum positive affect score and maximum negative affect
score of the agents, as well as the default score of GPT-3.5-Turbo,
which corresponds to the PANAS without any situation or context
provided.


The results show that overall, presenting negative scenarios to agents
decreased the positive affect and increased the negative affect scores
for both agents. Generally, agents using the prior context via the
norm had a greater increase in
negative affect in comparison to agents without context. This suggests
that agents are better able to understand negative emotions when they
have context.


TABLE


In addition, the decrease in positive affect is significantly greater
than the increase in negative affect. This result is in agreement with
the results of EmotionBench [*REF*], which found that
GPT-3.5-Turbo fails to react negatively to situations, with the
negative affect signficantly lower to the human counterpart.


Conclusion


In this work, we propose a novel generative agent architecture with
the aim of improving emotional alignment. In the proposed
architecture, agents perceive new experiences and subsequently create
a summary of past memories, referred to as the norm. This norm is then
used to see how the new experience compares to the past, creating a
contextual understanding. To capture the emotional reaction of the
agent in response to the new scenario, the PANAS is administered to
the agent, representing their positive and negative affect in response
to the exerpeince in context. By measuing how the results of the PANAS
change with each new experience, the evolution of the agents emotional
response can be measured.


To test this architecture, 428 emotionally charged situations from
EmotionBench were converted into 5-scene stories, with each story
acting as a new experience for the agent. By comparing the emotional
response of the agent with and without the proposed architecture, the
affect of context on emotional response can be captured.


Our preliminary results show that the addition of the context can more
accurately align the emotional response of agents with that expected
by humans. The addition of context, gave the agents a deeper
understanding of their situation, leading to a more suitable response.
However, if the situations remain ambigous even in context, then the
addition of context does not improve the alignment of emotion. On
average, the proposed model demonstrated similar affect scores to the
existing model, with only a slight increase in negative affect.
Although the context allowed for this increase, both models still fall
short in demonstrating a raised negative affect, in agreement with the
results of [*REF*]. One possible explanation for this is
a potential bias for GPT-3.5-Turbo to give positive responses. A more
in depth understanding of the agents responses with other LLMs in this
architecture is left to future work.


Future Work


One possible explanation for the low negative affect in the results is
bias in the model used for administering the PANAS, GPT-3.5-Turbo. In
future work, one should explore how the affect of the agent is altered
by the choice of model. For instance, open-source models such as Llama
[*REF*] may exhibit emotions more aligned with humans.


While the proposed architecture improves the emotional alignment in
the 5-part stories generated from EmotionBench situations, it remains
to be shown how this architecture scales to a large number of
memories. Such scaling requires the implementation of a memory
retriever function, like the memory retriver introduced in
[*REF*], to select which memories to use in the norm.
The design of the memory retriever, such as the weighting of recent,
relevant or important memories is likely to play a role in the
emotional alignment and is left to future work.


Finally, in future work it would be beneficial to administer the PANAS
to humans after they have read each of the 5-scene stories from the
EmotionBench scenario. By measuring how the response of humans evolves
in response to each of the emotioanlly charge situations, the accuracy
of this architecture could be validated and stronger conclusions could
be made.